---
number: 1
date: August 2024
day: <!-- put day of the month of release here -->
---

# Scientific Computing in Rust Monthly #1

Welcome to this month's issue of Scientific Computing in Rust Monthly.

<!-- Editor can write a 2-3 sentence introduction here -->

Scientific Computing in Rust Monthly can be viewed online
at [scientificcomputing.rs/monthly](https://scientificcomputing.rs/monthly) or you can sign up
to receive an email copy at [mailinglist.scientificcomputing.rs](https://mailinglist.scientificcomputing.rs).

Items can be added to the newsletter by opening a pull request to the
[Scientific Computing in Rust Monthly repository on GitHub](https://github.com/rust-scicomp/scientific-computing-in-rust-monthly).
You can find more information about adding items
[here](https://github.com/rust-scicomp/scientific-computing-in-rust-monthly#contributing-an-item).

## Crate of the month
<!--
The crate of the month will be picked by the editor, who will write a brief description of it here.
If you'd like to suggest a crate that we could include here, tell us on the rust-scicomp Zulip chat
(https://rust-scicomp.zulipchat.com/login/).
-->

## New releases
<!--
This section can be used to announce new released of libraries. Items should
be sorted in alphabetical order and should use the format:

### <library name> <release number>
<brief description of the library and its new features in this release>
-->

### `kifmm-rs` v1.0.1

With this release we now offer a highly competitive single node kiFMM, the notable features of this library being:

- _Competitive_ single-node performance, especially in single precision, enabled by the optimisation of BLAS based multipole to local (M2L) field translation, based entirely on level 3 operations with high arithmetic intensity that are well suited to modern hardware architectures that prioritise minimal memory movement per flop.
- The ability to _process multiple sets of source densities_ corresponding to the same point distribution using (\ref{eq:sec:summary:potential}), a common application in the Boundary Element Method.
- _A C API_, using Rust's C ABI compatibility allowing for the construction of bindings into other languages, with full Python bindings for non-specialist users.
- A _highly portable_ software with support for both x86 and Arm architectures.


## Events
<!--
This section can be used to advertise events. Items should be sorted in date order, with
sooner events first, and should use the format:

### [<event name>, <location or "held virutally">, <date>](<website URL>)
<brief description of event>
-->

## Publications
<!--
This section can be used to publicise papers, articles and blog posts published about scientific computing in Rust.
Items should be sorted in the alphabetical order of the surname of the first listed author.
Papers posted should use the following format:

### [<authors>, <title>, <journal> <volume>](<DOI>)
<brief description of paper>

Other publications should use the following format:

### [<author>, <title>](<link>)
<brief description>
-->

### [M. Bitar, "Rust and Julia for Scientific Computing" in Computing in Science & Engineering, vol. 26](https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/MCSE.2024.3369988)
Rust and Julia are two modern languages aiming to advance computing in their unique way.
Julia is a dynamic language striving to bridge the performance gap between dynamic languages like Python and statically typed ones like C/C++ while improving the ergonomics for scientific computing.
Rust, on the other hand, is a statically typed language with a friendly compiler guiding developers to write reliable, correct, and concurrent code while ensuring memory safety and unlocking the highest performance.
Both languages seem to be appealing to the scientific domain, especially because of their focus on performance.
But choosing one depends on the type of your project.


### [S. Kailasa "kifmm-rs: A Kernel-Independent Fast Multipole Framework in Rust" submitted to Journal of Open Source Software](https://github.com/bempp/kifmm/blob/main/paper/paper.pdf)
`kifmm-rs` is a framework for developing kernel independent Fast Multipole Methods (kiFMM) in Rust. This crucial algorithm accelerates potential evaluation problems to linear complexity in the best case, and finds application across science and engineering. This software demonstrates the capability of Rust as a tool for high-performance scientific computing, while retaining the portability productivity benefits offered by Rust as a platform.


## Jobs
<!--
This section can be used to advertise jobs that may be of interest. Items should be sorted in the
order in which they are added and should use the format:

### [<job title>, <location>](<more information URL>)
<description of job, including how to apply and deadline>
-->

## Miscellaneous
<!--
Any items that do not fit into any other section can be added here.
-->
